Human intervention in natural ecosystems has been highly influential since the last glacial period1. Human development has resulted in the mass extinction of species2, deterioration of ecosystems3 and global climate change4. Among many types of human-caused ecosystem impacts, the alteration of food web structures is one of the most difficult alterations to assess5 because information regarding the food web composition during prehuman conditions is scarcely available. However, stable isotope techniques can overcome these problems by reconstructing the historical feeding habits of omnivores and generalist predators with large home ranges and acting as a good indicator of food web structures5.
Brown bears (Ursus arctos), which are widely distributed throughout the northern hemisphere, are recognised as opportunistic omnivores that flexibly change their feeding habits depending on the availability of dietary resources6. Therefore, when the availability of certain resources in terrestrial ecosystems changes, the contribution of those resources to the brown bears' diet should change accordingly. In other words, the historical dietary information of brown bears should record changes in the food web structures of local terrestrial ecosystems over a given time period. Here, we investigated the millennium-scale diet changes in brown bears in the Hokkaido islands, Japan, using carbon, nitrogen and sulfur stable isotope analysis, and we assessed the impacts of human development on the food web structures of these terrestrial ecosystems.
The brown bear habitat extends throughout the Hokkaido islands. Significant human development began in this area in approximately mid-19th century and has proceeded rapidly in the last 200 years. Recent dietary studies of Hokkaido brown bears have suggested potential alterations in their feeding habits. First, brown bears generally eat large amounts of salmon if it is available78. However, although both brown bears and salmon are found in Hokkaido, salmon consumption by brown bears in this area is considered to be minimal9. To clarify the reason for the low rate of salmon consumption, Matsubayashi et al.10 examined spatial differences of salmon consumption by brown bears using stable isotope analysis in bone collagen and suggested that land development in Hokkaido has restricted salmon-bear interactions. Second, the abundance of Sika deer (Cervus nippon) has changed in Hokkaido over the last decades, and several dietary studies based on stomach content analysis showed that such changes in deer availability are reflected in the brown bear diet1112. Thus, the Hokkaido islands should be a suitable region to assess the relationship between human impacts and bear feeding habits.
In the Hokkaido islands, many animal bones, including brown bear bones, have been excavated near the remains of the indigenous Ainu people (Fig. 1). Stable isotope ratios of the collagen in animal bones reflect their feeding habits over several years13. We sampled bone collagen from the western and eastern regions in Hokkaido (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 1), which have different levels of salmon and deer abundance. In the western area, only chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta) run upstream from October to February, and the abundance of Sika deer is relatively low14. In contrast, in the eastern area, both pink salmon (O. gorbuscha) and chum salmon run upstream from August to October and from October to February, respectively, and the deer abundance is relatively high14. Brown bear bones from each region were divided into three time bins based on their time of death. These phases were defined based on the developmental chronology of the Hokkaido islands and are labelled as Period 1 (pre-development phase; before 1890 for Western area and 1920 for Eastern area), Period 2 (early phase of development; 1931–1942) and Period 3 (post-development phase; after 1996). In addition, we measured the stable isotope values of potential diet items of Hokkaido brown bears to assist in the interpretation of the isotopic values in brown bears.
